The nature of the dilemma of Schrodinger’s Cat is, like much else in the quantum world, one of measurement. In the case of Schrodinger’s Cat, the instrument used for measurement is human consciousness. The observer peeks in the box, light hits the retina, and the retina sends signals to the brain, and the brain forms an idea of the cat being either alive or dead. As it is now, a human consciousness is capable of seeing a cat only as either dead or alive, because that’s the way our consciousness manifests. I cannot see a cat as both dead and alive at the same time, which is why the case of Schrodinger’s Catbefuddles those who study it, because quantum theory tells us that the cat is simultaneously dead and alive until the instant that we open the box and peek inside.
But why is the case of Schrodinger’s Cat so ‘spooky’ in the first place? It is so because our consciousness interprets it as such. If human consciousness assumed a different manifestation, if, say, it had evolved a little differently, or a little more elaborately, we could hypothetically be able to see the whole amplitude, to see the cat both dead and alive at the same time, and it might not be all that spooky to consider that a cat might be dead or alive at the same time, because that’s how we would see everything, not necessarily as dead and alive, but in multiple and simultaneous potential states of existence. But, because our consciousness in its current state cannot see it like so, our consciousness will reduce the amplitude to a state that it’s capable of interpreting, and when we consider that the cat was in multiple states at the same time just a second ago, it’s befuddling.
Our consciousness could one day, with enough evolution or reconfiguring, see the entirety of a situation, or at least much more than we see now. Think of it like this: Lesser consciousnesses (like ‘lower’ animals) do not have the same cognitive processing skills that humans have. They lack the ability to see a hypothetical situation from multiple angles. But evolved humans can see a situation from multiple angles. So if I watch an intriguing movie scene, I’m able to interpret that scene from many different viewpoints (reasons why it’s good, why it’s bad), all of which might contradict each other, but all of which would be technically correct based on my state of consciousness.
We don’t question why it’s spooky for us to be able to see a movie scene from different angles, so why do we think it’s somehow spooky for a cat to be both dead and alive? The point: When it comes to amplitude and quantum reality, human consciousness has simply not evolved to a point where it can see physical things in multiple ways.
Here is the above summarized another way:
Consider the way consciousness presumably evolved. In the beginning, early consciousness could not detect the variables current human consciousnesses can today, nor had we developed cognitive capabilities like theory of mind. What might consciousness be like 10 million years from now, assuming our brains continue to evolve? Would the conundrum of Schrodinger’s Cat seem silly?
Indeed, further consider the way many mystics talk about an ‘ultimate’ state of consciousness. For example, many Eastern philosophies describe the highest state of consciousness as one of ‘nonduality’, where nothing can be opposed as long is to short, as positive is to negative, light to dark, pleasure to pain, finite to infinite, or, in the case of Schrodinger’s Cat, as dead is to alive. In a state of consciousness that is ‘nondual’, there wouldn’t even be cat, as a cat could be opposed to everything that is not a cat.
Yes, consciousness creates reality, and this reality that we create includes dualistic, mutually exclusive designations such as ‘dead’ and ‘alive’, not to mention the measurement tools we use to determine such (our senses and the brain that makes sense of our senses).
In sum, we are capable of concentrating on (creating) only one reality at a time, and in this reality we create distinctions among things, and therefore we create dilemmas like Schrodinger’s Cat.